## Transputer T805 emulator, assembler, and Pascal compiler

### by Oscar Toledo G. https://nanochess.org/

Once upon a time when I was a teen (1993), I wrote an almost full Pascal compiler for a transputer processor (the FILE type wasn't never completed)

It was the convergence of several things I had been learning that year: Pascal (The BYTE Book of Pascal), code generation (Compilers: Principles, Techniques and Tools), and transputer programming.

It was a time when the INMOS transputer promised parallel computing for everyone, but it was too expensive. They did a few good things, like a very fast 32-bit T805 transputer with 64-bit floating-point before the Intel 486DX2 was a thing.

In case you want to read the complete article: [https://nanochess.org/pascal.html](https://nanochess.org/pascal.html)

### What we have here

In order for you to experience my Pascal compiler, I needed to write two tools in modern C. Namely, the emulator for the transputer from the ground up, and port the assembler that ran on my Z280 host machine (the transputer was a board for the Z280 computer)

And nope, it wasn't a standard INMOS board, it was a board specifically designed for the Z280 computer.

The emulator supports _only_ the instructions that my bootstrap code needs, and the instructions generated by the Pascal compiler. I don't have yet tested the floating-point instructions, nor implemented support for big-endian architectures.

The assembler on the other side is based on more modern code used for my later C compiler for transputer (I'll write also something about this compiler), and supports the full instruction set for an Inmos T805 transputer.

Compilation instructions:

    cc tem.c -o tem
    
    cc tasm.c -o tasm

### Pascal compiler

The Pascal compiler follows the Niklaus Wirth's 1971 specification, and it is composed of the following files:

    pascal/variable.pas
    pascal/errores.pas
    pascal/analexic.pas
    pascal/gencodig.pas
    pascal/expresio.pas
    pascal/sentenci.pas
    pascal/declarac.pas
    pascal/principa.pas
    
A transputer executable is provided so you can compile programs immediately:

    pascal/pascal.cmg
    
An older version of the executable is provided for historical purposes (it has a bug handling NIL):

    pascal/pascal0.cmg
    
Two example programs are provided:

    pascal/Hanoi.pas       Hanoi tower solver (based on a book, but I forgot which one)
    pascal/animales.pas    The animals question game.

To compile a Pascal program use this (also in *compile.sh*):

    ./tem pascal/pascal.cmg animales.pas animales.len
    ./tasm animales.len animales.cmg library.len
    
To execute the compiled result:

    ./tem animales.cmg
    
Also there is longer command-line for compiling the Pascal compiler. Because it is somewhat cumbersome, I put it on *make_compiler.sh*

The file *library.len* contains the support library for the Pascal compiler.

The len extension means Listado ENsamblador (Assembler listing), while the CMG extension means (Codigo Maquina G10, or G10 machine code, where G10 was the name given to the transputer board)
 
 
## FURTHER NOTES

The original programs are under pascal/original because I translated Animales.pas to English. I intend to translate also the compiler error messages, but in the meanwhile it isn't urgent.

The tasm (transputer assembler) program is still in Spanish. It should be translated to English.

I'm afraid the whole of the Pascal files are commented in Spanish and even the variable names are Spanish. But given it is a ton of code, I preferred to leave it as such.
